The Joe Rogan experience.
When did all this come to light?
When did people start understanding the negative consequences of plastics
and your food?
Um, well, I came to understand it first in animals.
Um, cause that's the way science works. You know,
first you do animal studies and then you try to replicate them in humans. Right.
And so, um,
in around 2000 they did some experiments where they fed
a rat food contaminated with valleys,
and then they look to see how the offspring developed. Right.
And what they saw was that the males were born
different than the females and different from unexposed males.
Do you want me to tell you how, how different yes, please.
So this will really interest you. I think what, um, what happened is,
so let's go back. So before the salary,
it's the, you know, early in pregnancy,
the genitals are just a single Ridge,
same in males and females undifferentiated. Okay.
And then at a certain time, and in mice, rats,
it's 15 to 18 days of gestation,
the testicles start making testosterone.
And then that gives the signal to
produce the male typical genitals.
So if they don't have the testosterone,
there will be ovaries. And if there is testosterone,
they'll be testicles and so on and so forth. Right.
And that migration requires testosterone at exactly the right time
and the right amount. It's very delicately programmed. Okay.
So if that happens, if everything goes well,
then the penis will develop, it will have a certain size.
And then there's something which is very key to, to my research,
which is something you might know by the name of the taint
that taint or we call it Aina genital distance. Yeah.
It's not a real, it's not really a technical term, is it?
But I know genital distances. Yeah.
That's hilarious listening to a PhD. So.
I'm saying that because I'm talking to a lot of people who might not know.
Yes.
I'm known on the street as the pain and um,
or the or the Grundle, or.
That's never, you know, about the goods.
I just saw some seven the other day didn't know what a tank was and they're
like, oh, you mean the? I've never heard the. Yeah.
I thought the goose was like a baseball player in that. Well,
it could be that also, but isn't there a guy named Pete he's named after.
Sorry. I also ABC. Have.
You heard of ABC, ABC? No, I have not heard that. How's that going to go?
Asphalt connector. Oh, the asphalt connector. Okay. Yep. Okay.
What about for a woman?
Yes. You can measure. Yeah. It's not called, it's not called the ABC. Okay.
So here you got this distance and um,
it's been measured in animals for like a hundred years and what they use it for
was first to just sex the animal. So the litter is born.
There's a lot of little pups.
They want to separate the males in the females because they're going to do
different things from them and they just hold them up by the tail and they look.
And the reason you can do this is because in the male, it's much longer,
it's 50 or 100% longer. Now this is stop and think about this.
There's nothing else in the body.
That's that different between males and females in terms of size organs. Yes.
But size, no, you know, our Heights don't differ by 50 to 100% or weights.
Nothing, nothing. It's this is it. This is the,
the mark. It's not in all animals. It's almost all mammals. Really?
The hyena is a little different. We could talk.
A.
Whole bit about them. Yeah. Um, so, you know,
they're ma the females are masculinized, so they have a longer AGD. Right.
But most, for most mammals, it's this way. Okay.
Including humans.
So here's this little pup that's born and he's,
if he's unexposed, he'll have a good, you know,
a standard penal size and AGD,
and he won't have any malformations of his penis and so on, you know,
he'll be normal. But if his mother was exposed to salads,
everything can go south.
And what happens is the penis is smaller and the AGD is smaller
and the scrotum is smaller and the testes are maybe not descended.
In other words, it didn't finish the process. It was arrested if you will.
So we say that that, that pup is incompletely masculinized. Now.
The amount of ballots that get into the pup system in,
in Veeder, in, in utero, is that the same?
Is it possible to achieve those levels in the modern world with human beings?
And I'm going to tell you what I did to show that I showed that,
wow. So when I heard this story,
I was flying on a plane to Japan to go to a conference.
I was with a friend who was a chemist for the centers for disease control.
And he said, Shauna, you should study fallates and I'm going,
why I'd never heard of them? [inaudible]
. And he said, well, we have been measuring them at the CDC. And they're in everybody,
they're
in pregnant women. And this group of scientists in the national toxicology program has shown that they altered the development of the male newborn. And they called that the salad syndrome. That's what it's called. That collection of changes that come about after the mother has
salads is called the salad syndrome. So I thought, well, does that happen in
humans? Same question us. Right. So how do you, how would you, how would you answer that question then? I'll tell you what I did.
How would I, well,
you would hope that you're not running experiments.
Like you're running them on animals, right? Um,
are you measuring the blood of the people that are
having children that have issues like with, with,
uh, development,
development issues and the way the children look when they're born?
Is that what you're doing?
It's really close. So
that lights have the property that they dissolve in water and water soluble.
And so they go into the urine. So for this class of chemicals,
if you want to know how much is in your body and my body,
we got to measure the urine, other chemicals, um, like flame retardants,
we would look in the blood. So it depends what, what the chemical is, but,
but you're the right idea. Look inside the body. Okay.
Then rather than looking at kids with problems,
what I did was I just took a whole population of pregnant women
and I got their urine, measured, their salads,
got their kids, measured their kids.
So then I had the problem of what to measure in the kids,
because nobody had made this translation from an animal
genital development system to a human.
And so that was kind of a challenge, you know, figuring out how to do that.
But we did that and we developed this system for this exam for measuring
all these things that you measure in a rat. We measured it at our children.
And then we showed,
and this was big news when it came out that the mother's salads did alter
the generals of the boys.
So that was the first evidence that was 2005.
And then we published some more in 2008. And then we,
fortunately I got money to do it all again.
And age doesn't like to pay for replication. It's very expensive.
These things are $5 million a study by the way.
Well, it seems like it's very important.
Though. Yeah. So they gave it to me. They gave him my money to do it again.
So the second time I did a better, because I really knew what I was looking for.
And I got urine actually in three points in pregnancy.
And I measure the kids exactly when they're born.
So everything was much more precise. And I found it again.
So now there's no question.
I don't think anyone questions that at least this class of chemicals,
which we know lower testosterone alter the
development of these boys.
And then I asked, well, what does that have to do with sperm count?
Cause actually for a long time, we haven't talked yet about sperm count,
but I've been studying tracing, you know, what's happening with sperm count. Um,
I'll tell you the history of that in a minute. But so then I thought, well,
is this related to sperm count? Well,
these are babies that don't have a sperm count,
but in rats it looked like the AGD was permanent.
So if you were had a short and just like, if you have a small hand, you know,
your stature's certain set it at birth, right? So the AGD,
if you're born small and my friend Earl gray, who was a toxicologist said, AIG,
do's forever. We don't know that for sure about humans by the way. But,
um, cause we haven't had the 20 years yet. But um, if you believe that,
then a sensible thing to do was to take a group of adult men who could give
you a sperm count and measure their HED. Right.
And then you could see whether those with a shorter AGD had a lower
sperm count and then you would have one pretty solid piece of evidence that
chemicals in the environment, lower sperm count.
Are you with me? Yes.
Ma'am. Okay. So I did that study too.
So I got students in Rochester,
New York to volunteer for seventy-five bucks to
participate and they gave us a semen sample and they gave us opportunity to
measure them also a questionnaire.
How does one measure kids taints?
Do they just bend over and you bust out a ruler? I happened.
To bring it, bring you something to.
Show this. I noticed you had this measuring device.
Jamie's volunteered to let you measure his tank by the way.
So, um, this is not for a baby. This is for,
this is for our Rochester young men's study. Um,
and it's looks kind of fierce. Um,
but we had the points taken down and I.
Use one of those to measure a pool. Q-tips there you go.
All right. So you know all about it. It's true.
You want 13 millimeters? That's what I like, but only for.
So look, um, I also brought you a little diagram,
so you see where we measure. Okay. But we can't show this to.
So the calipers are in there in millimeters or inches or bolts. Yes.
Both. You can come. Yeah. Yeah. And, and so what you do.
Oh, you got a diagram chart online. I could look up like a, a,
how would I just hold this up?
Yeah. Yup. All right.
Can we have a selfie with you and me in that picture?
Okay. All right. So what I wanted to,
so when I publish this, the, uh, the headlines were size matters,
but it's not what you think. Right. And so I got all these people asking me,
what should it be? What's good enough. What's big enough.
So I did this translation from the millimeters for you. So here it is,
the two inches is, is the media
okay. And in this population and, um,
here's the kicker.
If it was less than two men who had less than two inches were
seven times more likely to have a sperm count in the
subfertile range. I can tell you what that is.
As men who had an AGD longer than two inches.
Wow. Seven times
it's certainly is related to sperm count.
And then another study in California showed that infertile men in an
infertility clinic versus men who had come had born,
a child had smaller
taint length. When.
Did this stuff start getting into our food supply? Does that,
is that been estimated?
So the growth of these chemicals,
um, tracks with the growth of
the petrochemical industry, because they're made from petrochemical byproducts.
Okay. So if you look at a curve of the growth, it starts around the 50, 19 50.
Okay. So back in 1950,
you have people loving science,
jumping on the science bandwagon.
There's this better living through chemistry that everyone's talking about.
And it's everybody is just wanting everything made of plastic.
You know, it's the new, it's the new craze, it's the new, you know, and,
and it just took off. It went faster than a straight line, you know,
exponentially up. And so somewhere in there,
it started having an effect, but where we're not sure,
but I did look at the decline in sperm count over time.
So we could look at that as an indication that this is not the only
thing that's affecting sperm count by the way, these salads.
But that's one where I feel,
I can say this with confidence because I measured those babies. And I, you know,
I did it, I did the science and I did it again. And I, you know,
and other people have done it. And, and so it's, it's,
I believe it's solid. And, um,
that's just one example of the many chemicals that can affect our hormone
system.
Catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify,
watch back catalog J R E videos on Spotify,
including clips easily seamlessly switch between video
and audio experience on Spotify.
You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can
download episodes to save on data costs. All for free.
Spotify is absolutely free.
You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes.
You just need to search for the Jerry on your Spotify app.
Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan.